# Real-Time Traffic Monitoring and Prediction for Cranberry Township
Cranberry Township is a Progressive Municipality that works to maintain traffic efficiency on its transportation networks. Cranberry Township’s unique geographical location at the junction of Interstates 79 and Interstates 76 (PA Turnpike) can pose interesting challenges in coordinated operations.
Specifically, the Township operates a Coordinated Signal System that relies on historically Generated Signal Timings, coupled with real time technology to manage day to day operations on the local network. Unfortunately, any unscheduled events on the limited access highways can cause havoc with our inefficient operation. 

This project incorporates real time data inputs monitored from crowdsourced data feeds, traffic sensors and weather reports in these limited access highways to predict traffic delays for the next 30 minutes. These predictions, together with the current traffic conditions in Cranberry Township, are used to trigger effective contingency plans using a well-tuned rule-based approach. A traffic information system is then built to visualize the predictions and direct the signal plan recommendations to multiple directives, including dynamic online dashboards, email notifications and text messages. Because our predictions is able to generate contingency signal plan well ahead of actual traffic breakdowns, our system can alert traffic operators the forthcoming traffic issue in Cranberry Township, to allow for in-time adjustments to the operating traffic plan on real-time basis.

## Dynamic dashboard
The dynamic dashboard is the front-end of our model predictions and recommendation system. This design has the following highlighted functions.

### Interactive visualizations 
The dashboard visualizes current and predicted traffic speed, traffic incidents provided by RCRS and Waze both on a map and in dynamic tables, and shows recommended signal plan on a dynamic message board. Traffic managers can visualize predicted traffic for a road segment by clicking the segment on the map. The visualizations are shown on interactive plots and by animation.

* Traffic speed: Both current and predicted traffic speed are visualized on the map. Users can use ``Forecasting horizon`` slider under ``Map control`` to select the forecasting horizon (0 min - 30 min) and visualize the predicted traffic on the map. Note the default forecasting horizon is set as 0 to show real-time traffic. An animation of the predicted traffic evolution in the next 30 minutes can be generated by clicking the ``Play`` button positioned under the slider. Users can further examine the traffic predictions of a certain road segment by clicking the segment on the map. The interactive prediction plots are shown in ``Traffic predictions`` panel.

* Traffic incidents: RCRS incidents and Waze alerts effective at the present are visualized on the map and listed in the tables. Users can hover over the red dots (RCRS) and blue dots (Waze) to see the details (e.g. Reported time, Road name, Cause, Lane status, etc.) of these incidents. We also provide tabular views of traffic incidents to ease user searching. Users can do keyword search and sorting, change the number of rows, and go to selected pages in this dynamic table to look for incidents of interest.

* Message board: The dynamic message board shows the last update time and signal recommendations with brief reasons for making these recommendations.  

### Real-time updates  
This dashboard is updated every 5 minutes from 7:30 AM to 8:30 PM everyday to provide real-time decision support for traffic managers. 

### Alerts

The traffic information system sends alerts to traffic managers by email and by text message if any traffic information, incidents or weather trigger the rules of recommendation systems. An email notification from the system email account ([cmumactrack@gmail.com](cmumactrack@gmail.com)) will be sent to traffic managers in Cranberry Township to alert them of the possible traffic breakdown and to recommend them signal plans. The system also sends alerts by text messages from +1 (412) 419-3449 to traffic managers. Note that alerts will only be sent if a change in signal plan recommendation is triggered. 
